---
layout: post
title: UVa 1753 - Need For Speed
tags: [UVa]
---

An interesting binary search problem. This problem appeared in the ACM ICPC World Finals 2017. 

We need to calculate an unknown constant $c$ (possibly negative).

First we need to establish an upper and lower bound on the value of $c$. The problem statement mentions that: <b> "Note that while Sheila’s speedometer might have negative readings, her true speed was greater than zero for each segment of the journey." </b>

Given Sheilas true speed as $s + c$, we have, $s + c > 0$ at any given point in time.

Our strategy will be to guess the value of $c$, and then check if it is a valid guess. If not, then just keep guessing until we have a valid value of $c$. 

Say, we have a guess $c^\prime$. How can we know if this is a valid guess?

We know that, $t = \ddfrac{d}{s}$. Where, $t = \textrm{time}$, $d = \textrm{distance}$, and $ s = \textrm{speed}$.

So we have guessed the actual speed as $s + c^\prime$. Given our guess and the distances of each segment, we can check if the journey actually takes time $t$ or not. Namely we're checking,

\\[ \sum_{i = 1}^{n} \ddfrac{d_i}{s_i + c^\prime} \stackrel{\Large{?}}{=} t\\]

Now, $s_{\textrm{min}} = -1000$. So, $ c \not\leq -1000$. 

Again, $d_{\textrm{max}} = 1000$. In order to find $c_{\textrm{max}}$, we let $d_i = 1000$ and $s_i = -1000$ for $1 \leq i \leq n$. So we have,

\\[ \sum_{i = 1}^{1000} \ddfrac{1000}{-1000 + c_{\textrm{max}}} = t_{\textrm{min}} = 1\\]
\\[ \Longrightarrow \ddfrac{1000 \times 1000}{-1000 + c_{\textrm{max}}} = 1\\]
\\[ \Longrightarrow -1000 + c_{\textrm{max}} = 10^6 \\]
\\[ \Longrightarrow c_{\textrm{max}} = 10^6 + 1000\\]

Now that we've established both the lower and upper bound for $c$, we can carry out binary search. 

Here's my implementation in ``C++``:

{% highlight C++ linenos %}
#include <iostream>
#include <cmath>
#include <vector>
#include <iomanip>

class Segment{
    public:
        int distance, speed;
};

class Pair{
    public:
        bool decrease, increase;
};

constexpr double EPS = 1e-7;

Pair check(double c, double t, const std::vector <Segment> &segments){
    double calculated_time = 0.0;
    for(int i = 0 ; i < segments.size() ; ++i){
        double value = segments[i].speed + c;
        if(value < EPS) return {false, true}; // need to increase c
        calculated_time += segments[i].distance / (segments[i].speed + c);
    }
    if(calculated_time < t) return {true, false}; // need to decrease c
    return {false, true}; // need to increase c
}

double binary_search(double t, const std::vector <Segment> &segments){
    double lo = -1000 + EPS, hi = 1e6 + 1000.00;
    while(hi - lo > EPS){
        double mid = (lo + hi) / 2;
        Pair ret = check(mid, t, segments);
        if(ret.decrease){
            hi = mid;
        } else{
            lo = mid;
        }
    }
    return lo;
}

int main(int argc, char const *argv[])
{
    int n, t;
    while(std::cin >> n >> t){
        std::vector <Segment> segments(n);
        for(int i = 0 ; i < n ; ++i){
            std::cin >> segments[i].distance >> segments[i].speed;
        }
        std::cout << std::setprecision(10) << binary_search(t, segments) << '\n';
    }
    return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}