---
layout: post
title: Div function in C++
subtitle: How to find quotient and remainder in a single step
tags: [C++]
---

Oftentimes I encounter situations like the following:

[comment]: # {: .box-note} , {: .box-error}, {: .box-warning}

{: .box-error} 
I have two integers $x$ and $y$ in a loop. If $y$ divides evenly into $x$, then I want to find out the quotient $\ddfrac{x}{y}$ and ``break`` out of loop. Otherwise ``continue``. 

Now so far I was doing something like this:

{% gist 22cf61c2cde3435140592629af049039 test-1.cpp %}

Now what bothered me is that I knew for any given pair of integer $(x,y)$ there exists a quotient $q$ and remainder $r$ such that:

\\[x = q\times y + r\\]

and you can actually find $q$ and $r$ both at the same time using algorithms like [Extended Euclidean Algorithm](/2020-05-19-extended-euclid). So instead of checking $x \% y$ first and then computing the quotient again, we can just simply compute it once. But this meant I had to implement my own version of Extended Euclid as I didn't know of any library functions. This isn't a clean solution. 

Today I came to know there is indeed a library function for this! It called ``div()`` and it's included in the ``cstdlib`` header. ``div()`` takes two parameters: one integer numerator and one integer denominator and returns a ``struct`` which has the following definition:

{% gist 22cf61c2cde3435140592629af049039 test-2.h %}

So, now the above code becomes:

{% gist 22cf61c2cde3435140592629af049039 test-3.cpp %}

This is a much cleaner and efficient solution. There are also ``ldiv_t`` and ``lldiv_t`` for ``long`` and ``long long`` data types. Check out [this link](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/math/div) for more details!

